1. Which of these types of matter will have a definite volume but not a definite shape?
a) gas
*b) liquid
c) solid
d) London Dispersion Force
e) all of the above
2. What general term is used to describe molecules of the same kind have a force or attraction to each other?
a) heat capacity
b) liquid
c) adhesion
*d) cohesion
e) enthalpy
3. What is true about the water, the liquid phase of H2O?
a) It is nonpolar
b) It is considered a universal solvent
c) Compared to metal solids like steel, it can absorb heat energy without large changes in temperature
*d) choices [b] and [c] are true
e) choices [a], [b], [c] are true
4. Which of these terms describes the ability of water to form a compact, spherical droplet on a surface?
a) viscosity
b) heat capacity
*c) surface tension
d) capillary action
e) none of the above
5. Which of these crystalline solids will be the best choice for a electrical conductor?
a) the sodium chloride ionic crystal
b) the molecular solid of dry ice (carbon dioxide, CO2)
c) the covalent network solid of carbon, the diamond
*d) the metallic solid which is a bar of gold (Au)
6. What is the term used to describe the production of a gaseous state from a liquid state?
*a) boiling 
b) freezing
c) condensation
d) sublimation
7. What is the term used to describe the production of a gaseous state directly from a solid state?
a) boiling 
b) vaporization
c) condensation
*d) sublimation
8. What is the term used to describe the production of a gaseous state from a liquid state but below its boiling point temperature?
a) boiling 
b) freezing
*c) evaporation
d) sublimation
9. Assume specific heat capacity of cadmium (Cd) is 0.25 J/(g °C). A 5.00 g piece of cadmium metal is heated from 20°C to 40°C. How many joules of heat energy were transferred to the metal?
a) 400 J
*b) 25 J
c) 1.0 J
d) 0.063 J
10. Assume H2O as a liquid (water) has a specific heat capacity of 4.184 J/(g °C). You used 500.0 calories (cal) of heat a mass of water from 20° C to 40°C. What is the volume of water in milliliters (mL) that you have? (Hint: you will use two conversion factors given to you for calculating this)
a) 500.0 mL
b) 2092 mL
*c) 25.00 mL
d) 20.00 mL
11. Calculate the specific heat capacity of H2O in J/(g °C) as a solid (ice) if a 1.000 kilogram (kg) block of ice is heated from -20°C to -5°C using 30.0 kJ of heat. You will have to use two conversion factors in getting the answer
a) 1.00 J
*b) 2.00 J/(g °C)
c) 30.0 J/(g °C)
d) 200 J/(g °C)
e) 30.0 g
12. What is a TRUE characteristic of the Type I ion?
a) it is negatively charged
*b) the metal cations of Group I and Group II elements are classic examples of these ions
c) it is an element that can ionize to more than one charge state (for example, it can be +1, +2, +3, and even -1, -2, etc)
d) it only applies to charge states of element oxygen (O)
e) the element's name in a compound requires the use of a roman numeral (the Stock system)
13. What is FALSE about the characteristics of a Type II ion?
a) it is positively charged
b) the metal cations of Group I and Group II elements are classic examples of these ions
c) it is an element that can ionize to more than one charge state (for example, it can be +1, +2, +3, and even -1, -2, etc)
*d) it only applies to charge states of element oxygen (O)
e) the element's name in a compound requires the use of a roman numeral (the Stock system)
14. What is the chemical formula for calcium sulfate?
a) CaSO3
*b) CaSO4
c) Ca(SO3)2
d) Ca(SO4)2
e) Ca4S3
15. What is the chemical formula for hydrochloric acid?
a) NCl3
b) HF
*c) HCl
d) HPOCl2
e) HCl2
16. What is the name of the compound with chemical formula KCl?
a) potassium carbon lithium
b) potassium chlorate
c) potassium(I) perchlorate
d) potassium chlorous acid 
*e) potassium chloride
17. What is the correct and complete name of this compound you made in lab with chemical formula Cu2S?
a) copper sulfate
b) copper sulfide
*c) copper(I) sulfide
d) copper(II) sulfide
e) cuprous(II) sulfite
18. What is the chemical formula of the molecule dinitrogen tetraoxide?
a) NO3
*b) N2O4
c) (NO2)4
d) NO24
e) 2(N4O)
19. In drawing a Lewis structure for the carbonate (CO3)2- ion, you have placed the octet around the three oxygen (O) atoms, but you see the central carbon [c] atom has only six electrons (3 bonding pairs) to the oxygen atoms. You have no electrons remaining to add in your inventory. What step do you need to do?
a) Nothing: your Lewis structure is ready and complete
b) Use Avogadro's Number at an earlier step
c) Add a hydrogen atom to the molecule
*d) A lone pair from one of the oxygen (O) atoms will have to be used to create a double bond with the central carbon
e) The noble gas argon (Ar) must provide a single electron to complete this structure
20. What is FALSE in the formation of the ionic compound magnesium oxide (MgO) from magnesium metal (Mg) and oxygen (O)?
a) the Group 2 metal Mg atom has two valence electrons it will give to the Group 16 nonmetal oxygen (O) atom
b) this transfer of electrons from Mg to O is about achieving the stability of a noble gas electron configuration
*c) Magnesium (Mg) will take electrons from oxygen (O) to form the ionic compound MgO
d) Magnesium will become a Mg2+ cation and oxygen will become an O2- anion during ionization
e) The Lewis structure of the O atom will have four pairs of dots around it 
21. What statement(s) is/are TRUE concerning the concept of "formal charge"?
a) it represents the charge of a molecule after counting all electrons against the protons of all atoms
*b) it represents the hypothetical charge on an atom in a molecule based on the valence electrons it possesses
c) it is used to determine how many hydrogen atoms are missing in a molecule
d) it helps to estimate the neutrons in the atom's nucleus
e) the term refers ONLY to boron trifluoride have trigonal pyramidal geometry
22. A molecule has four terminal electron groups around a central atom. Its molecular geometry is:
a) linear
b) trigonal planar
c) bent
d) trigonal pyramidal
*e) tetrahedral
23. What is/are TRUE statements about a bond dipole?
*a) the dipole moment exists because of electronegativity differences between the two atoms
b) the bond dipole can be shown in a structure using the crossed arrow symbol
c) the term "bond dipole" and "molecular dipole" are the same 
d) [a] and [b] are true
e) [a], [b], and [c] are true
24. What is a FALSE statement about the concept of the molecular dipole?
a) the molecular dipole is a result of all the individual bond dipoles in the molecule
b) molecular dipoles are very likely when atoms in the whole molecular structure show asymmetry 
*c) the presence of lone pairs in the central atom of a molecule are not important in molecule having a dipole
d) it is possible for a molecule to have no (zero) molecular dipole despite numerous bond dipoles
25. Carbon and hydrogen have very little difference in their electronegativity. What kind of bond will they form?
a) ionic 
b) metallic 
*c) covalent 
d) polar covalent 
e) fluidic 
26. When atoms like cesium and fluorine have the largest differences in electronegativity, what kind of bond will they form?
*a) ionic 
b) metallic 
c) covalent 
d) polar covalent 
e) covalent-ionic
27. A "formula unit" is a term that applies to ionic compound solids like sodium chloride (NaCl)
*a) true
b) false 
28. Diatomic element molecules like Cl2 are polar molecules because they have a single polar covalent bond.
a) true
*b) false
29. A molecule that is trigonal planar in geometry has three electron groups with 120° bond angles
*a) true
b) false
30. A molecule has a central atom with two nonbonding (lone) electron pairs and two terminal atoms will have a trigonal pyramidal molecular geometry
a) true 
*b) false
31. Valence Shell Electron Pair Repulsion explains why nonbonding (lone) electron pairs in a central atom can crowd out and narrow the angle of terminal atoms or electron groups in a molecule
*a) true 
b) false
32. The H2O molecule going from steam (gas phase) to ice (solid phase) is an exothermic process
*a) true
b) false
33. The burning of gasoline is an endothermic reaction
a) true
*b) false
34. The formation of ice on a pond is an exothermic process
*a) true 
b) false
35. The boiling of water is an endothermic process
*a) true
b) false
